this tutorial series is brought to you
by polygon make better renders faster
g'day and welcome to another edition of
donuts will haunt your dreams soon
because they're horton mine uh
seriously i've spent i've been thinking
about nothing else for three weeks other
than donuts i'm actually dreaming of
donuts no that's not a joke
anyways
we have uh in the last video we painted
our donut and it looks more donuty
but not enough it still looks like
something you'd see out of an early
pixar movie because there's no detail to
the surface of our donut if you compare
it to reference photos of donuts you can
see you got all this like glistening
bits that are sticking out
and like bumps and little crevices and
dark patches and all that good stuff and
that is the perfect thing not for
painting but for procedural texturing so
with your donut selected we're going to
go into the shading mode which is this
mode right here
and um by the way just in case it's not
um
it should be look dev mode when you are
in shading mode and by the way this uh i
didn't really explain what look dev mode
is but uh solid view mode is the same
mode that you see when you're in like
layout mode like this this view um and
then look dev mode is actually using the
ev renderer to preview your material
that you've got active
with an hdr so it's using the hdr that's
available here which is basically like a
template light and reflections for it
so look dev stands for look development
so it's the perfect shader for yeah
previewing materials so that you can
work fast without having to set up
lights and everything it's just like
it's there and it's it's awesome so when
you go into shading mode it should
already be there in look dev mode but
just telling you in case it's not
anyways okay so
to put that at the top there and then
here we have our node setup okay so
right now all we've got is just that
image texture that we painted and that's
going straight into our base color there
so what we want to do is we want to add
in a procedural texture procedural means
it's by
computer generated um so to do that
we're going to go shift a
and then where it's got texture you can
see you've got a whole range of
different textures here image texture
was the one that we used before
that's obvious and then the one we're
looking for is noise texture so we add
that and that'll drop this guy in here
and if we want to look at what this is
going to look like on our mesh the best
way to do that is to actually use an
add-on that comes with blender so if you
go to edit preferences and then
underneath the add-on section search for
nodewrangler and then just check the box
next to it and that will enable it and
then once you've done that you can
control shift left click on that node
and it will preview it over
over your model right let me just hide
that stuff there we go um and there you
go so you can see that's what the
texture is doing so that's the default
like color input but if you control
shift click on it again it'll view the
next input down which is the faq or
factor
and that's black and white so what we
want to do is we want to use this black
and white
cloud texture to drive the bumpiness
of our material as well as the color and
to contribute to it in that way and it's
a very common way of just adding like
free detail to objects but before we do
that one thing to note looking at the
donut here with this texture the texture
is kind of stretched like there's more
detail across this surface but less this
way and that's just because the way that
this is mapped onto it right now it's
not using uvs or anything like that um
but uh the the best way to change that
is by adding in a shift a
vector
uh mapping no hang on
texture coordinates that's the one
texture coordinate node and if we just
take the object output and drop that
into the vector input this is now going
to use the object data which is actually
most appropriate for like procedural
textures anyways now that i've done that
if we increase the scale of this we
should see pretty standard detail
everywhere without there being like more
or less detail in different places so
that's good okay so
looking at this this cloudy texture here
um
yeah i mean let's just set this to i
don't know 300 that's that looks fine um
and let's start by making this affect
the bump of our of our material so
uh to use bump mapping in blender
there's two ways of basically
contributing to bump there's bump which
is kind of like fake bump and then
there's bump which is real bump and
that's actually changing the shape of
the actual mesh and that's the one we
want to use for this so that's called
displacements so i'm going to take this
output of this
and i am going to
add in shift a
a vector underneath vector displacement
so drop this in here and then what i
want to do is i want to take the factor
output of that and put that into the top
of the height
and then i want to take that
displacement and put that
into the bottom of our material output
right there okay now by by default it's
still looking at this noise texture here
but if we ctrl shift click on our just
main shader the printable shader we
should now see
the effect of that on our mesh now
currently we can't because we're
actually in look dev mode and it's kind
of like not showing us the detail very
well but in rendered view mode you can
see
with actual light that has like shadows
and everything you can see the effect
that it's having and um again this
clipping thing it's going to drive me
crazy
um
and my screen keys tool is turned off
not that it really matters for this part
but anyways uh okay so that's that's the
kind of bump that it's got over our mesh
and that looks pretty good it's not bad
but you'll see that it's um it's not
changing the like if you look at the
edges of the object the edges of the
object aren't changed so when you're
doing it just like this this is like
this is actually the fake bump way it
would be the same as if you put it into
the normal input for those who know what
that is um
but by default this is what it's doing
so it's the fake bump but if we want to
make it so that it actually is
displacing the shape of our mesh we want
to change right down here
underneath your settings you want to
change the displacement from bump only
to displacement and bump before i do
that let me just ctrl shift
and save because uh i am using a
experimental build
okay there we go so when you do that
what it's going to do now is it's
actually
displacing the donut and hey anybody
order a porcupine
um
the reason is it's the scale of it this
is the height of the the bump that that
value there way too high so we're going
to set this to 0.01
and let's see how that looks
there we go so you can see now looking
at the edge of it at the edge of the
doughnut
um it's actually physically displacing
you can see that looks a lot more
realistic
than before this is with bump only and
then this is with displacement and bump
now i think scale of .01 is still too
high let's go point zero
two perhaps or point zero
three perhaps
something like that
that's okay and by the way this is using
the um the mesh to displace it so it
will depend the look of your your
displacement will depend on the number
of vertices that you've got here the
amount of detail if you don't have
enough detail and you want to add more
you can just go to the modifier stack
and add in a new
subsurf modifier like this and then you
would see like smoother like less spikes
if you see like lots of spikes it's
generally a sign you've got like not
enough uh vertices for it to play with
so you might want to add a subsurf
modifier in there but anyways that's
that's not bad now what i actually want
is for like really really small detail
so i'm going to crank this scale up to 1
000 now let's go 115
no not 15 000. fifteen hundred there we
go
something like that
um
great so this is uh this was a good
little primer to show you what
procedural textures can do um but in the
next video because i want to keep these
you know relatively short uh we're going
to add in um
another procedural text we're going to
combine it and we're going to make it
contribute to the color map as well and
then just basically finish off the donut
and finish off level 2. so click here to
watch the next part and i will see you
there